Word: عَبَدَ
Word_ID:1298
MeaningSimple:Slave, a servant, obedient. 
Meaning:  عَبَدَ [aor.  يَعْبُدُ inf. noun  عَبَا دَةٌ  and   عُبُوْدِيَّةٌ and مَعْبَدٌ  ] Slave, to serve Allah. obedient like a slave. عَبَدَ اللّٰهَ He served, worshipped or adored God alone, or he rendered to God humble obedience; he obeyed Him.
Example:  فَٱدْخُلِى فِى عِبَٰدِى : then enter thou among My righteous servants (or among My peculiar party) ( فِىْ حِزْبِىْ  ) (89:30)
Example:  لَا تَعْبُدُونَ إِلَّا ٱللَّهَ :You will worship none but Allah  (2:84).
Meaning:   عَبُدَ (aor.  يَعْبُدُ ) : He was or became a slave, his forefathers having been so before him.
Meaning:  عَبِدَ (aor.  يَعْبَدُ ): He was angry.  عَبِدَ عَلَيْهِ : He was angry with him. 
Meaning:  عَبِدَ مِنْهُ: He disdained or scorned him. 
Meaning:  عَبِدَ  : He denied, dis acknowledged or disallowed; he repented and blamed himself for having been amiss; he mourned, grieved or was sorrowful; he was covetous.  عَبِدَ بِهٖ : He clove to it or him.
Example:  مَا عَبَدَ كَ عَنِّىْ   : What has withheld thee from me.
Meaning:  عَبَّدَهٗ  : He enslaved him; he subdued him so that he did the work of slaves.
Example:  عَبَّدتَّ بَنِىٓ إِسْرَٰٓءِيلَ : That thou hast enslaved the children of Israel (26:23)
 Meaning: (syn.  ذَلَّلَ).عَبَّدَ الطَّرِيْقَ   : He trod the road so as to make it even or easy to walk or ride upon.  عَبَّدَ الْبَعِيْرَ : He subdued or rendered the camel submissive. عَبَّدَ الرَّجُلُ: The man hastened or went quickly.   عَبْدٌ : A male slave.
Example:  لَعَبْدٌمُّؤْمِنٌ خَيْرٌ : A believing slave is better (2:222)
Meaning: A servant or worshipper of God and of a false god.
Example:  قَالَ إِنِّى عَبْدُ ٱللَّهِ :He said, I am a servant of Allah (19:31)
Example:  عَبْدَيْنِ مِنْ عِبَادِنَا صَٰلِحَيْنِ : (dual of  عَبْدٌ  ) : Two servants (66:11)
Example:  وَٱللَّهُ بَصِيرٌۢ بِٱلْعِبَادِ :  And ALLAH is Watchful of HIS servants. plural (3:21)  عَبِيْدٌ (also plural of عَبْدٌ ).
Example:  ٱللَّهَ لَيْسَ بِظَلَّامٍ لِّلْعَبِيدِ : He does not wrong (His) servants  (3:183)
Meaning:  عَبْدٌ signifies a human being as being a bondman to his Creator, applied to a male and female; also means ignoble or base-born; also a righteous servant of God.
Example:  هُمْ عَبَدَةُ الطَّا غُوْتِ : They are the worshippers or servants of the Devil.  عَبْدُ الشَّمْسِ: The servant or worshipper of the sun.
Meaning: عَابِدٌ   (act. part.): A servant; a worshipper.
Example:  وَلَآ أَنَا۠ عَابِدٌ مَّا عَبَدتُّمْ : And I am not going to worship what you worship (109:5)
Meaning:  مَعْبُوْدٌ (pass. part): God worshipped. 
Example:  وَلَآ أَنتُمْ عَٰبِدُونَ مَآ :  (plurals of  عَابِدٌ ) (109:6;21:107)
Meaning:  عَابِدٌ also means angry, disdaining or disdainful, scorning or scornful.
Example:  قُلْ إِن كَانَ لِلرَّحْمَٰنِ وَلَدٌ فَأَنَا۠ أَوَّلُ ٱلْعَٰبِدِينَ : (may be interpreted as): There is not to the Compassionate God a son; and I am the first of the angry disdainers of the assertion that there is one; or I am the first of the deniers of this assertion; or I am the first of the worshippers of God, or I would be the first of his (the son's) worshippers if there be to the Gracious God a son in your opinion; I am the first of those who have worshipped God alone, and who have thus charged you with uttering a falsehood in this your assertion (43:82)
Meaning: عَابِدَاتٌ (singular عَابِدَةٌ feminine of  عَابِدٌ ).
Example: تَٰٓئِبَٰتٍ عَٰبِدَٰتٍ : Always turning to God, devout in worship (66:6)
Meaning: عِبَادَةٌ Worship; service.
Example: وَٱصْطَبِرْ لِعِبَٰدَتِهِۦ : Be steadfast in His service  (19:66)
